****************************************
1. List of character species
****************************************

Species are categorised, roughly, by how difficult and complex they are to
learn how to play, into three categories: *Simple*, *Intermediate*, and
*Advanced*. These categories do not necessarily align with difficulty for an
experienced Crawl player, but rather are intended as an indication of to what
degree a species has unusual or complex mechanics, or requires deeper/wider
knowledge of how the game works. (For example, Djinn have one of the higher
win rates of all species, but are classified as "Intermediate" because
their no-mp/no-books mechanic takes some adapting to, and has non-trivial
interactions with background and god choice.) Despite being the outcome of a
discussion among many players, these categorizations definitely have a
subjective element to them, and you shouldn't take them to be limiting!

The order within categories is also, roughly, determined by our best judgment
about the relative ease of learning to play each species.

Next to each species name, in parentheses, is the canonical abbreviation for
the species.

.. note:: Use 'A' to check for which particular peculiarities a species might
          have. Also, some species have special abilities which can be accessed
          by the 'a' abilities menu. Some also have physical characteristics
          which allow them to make extra attacks.

.. note:: Humans are a useful reference point when considering other species:
          they have 0 for almost all aptitudes; have no special abilities,
          weakness, or constraints against using certain types of equipment;
          move normally; and gain experience and willpower at a "typical"
          rate. However, you will see that they are categorised as an
          *Intermediate* species -- because they are decent, but not excellent,
          at nearly everything, a Human may need to make use of all sorts of
          game mechanics depending on what they find in the dungeon, and know
          how to defend itself against any type of damage or attack it
          encounters.

Simple species
==============

Species categorised as *Simple* work straightforwardly for players who have
less experience with Crawl's game mechanics. While many do have quirks, these
quirks tend to be passive traits that simplify gameplay, rather than challenges
that a player has to consciously work around. While all of these species do
have weaknesses of some kind, these weaknesses are simple to understand, aren't
fundamentally crippling to all members of the species, and are balanced by
other strengths. In many cases the special properties of these species allow
the player to set aside many aspects of the game while still developing a
strong character.


Hill Orcs (HO)
  Hill Orcs are Orcs from the upper world who, jealous of the riches which their
  cousins (the Cave Orcs) possess below the ground, descend in search of plunder
  and adventure.

  Hill Orcs are strong and robust. Their forte is brute-force fighting, and they
  are skilled at using most hand weapons (particularly axes, with which they are
  experts), though they are not particularly good at using missile weapons. Hill
  Orcs are passable users of most types of magic and are particularly skilled
  with fire.

  Hill Orcs have a strong connection to the gods and learn Invocations very
  quickly. The Orc god Beogh is worshipped only by Orcs, and the orc priests of
  the Dungeon preach that Beogh is indeed the only true god. Hill Orcs may
  convert to Beogh even without an altar whenever an orc priest is in sight.

Minotaurs (Mi)
  The Minotaurs are a species of hybrids, possessing human bodies with bovine
  heads. They delve into the Dungeon because of their instinctive love of
  twisting passageways.

  Minotaurs are extremely good at all forms of physical combat, but are awful at
  using any type of magic. They can wear all armour except for some headgear.
  When in close combat, Minotaurs are able to reflexively headbutt those who
  dare attack them.

Merfolk (Mf)
  The Merfolk are a hybrid species of half-human, half-fish that typically live
  in the oceans and rivers, seldom venturing toward land. However, Merfolk
  aren't as limited on land as some myths suggest; their tails will quickly
  reform into legs once they leave the water (and, likewise, their legs will
  quickly reform into a tail should they ever enter water). They tend to be
  surprisingly nimble on land as well as in the water. Experts at swimming,
  they need not fear drowning and move very quickly through water.

  The Merfolk have developed their martial arts strongly on thrusting and
  grappling, since those are the most efficient ways to fight underwater. They
  therefore prefer polearms and short swords above all other weapons, though
  they can also use longer swords quite well.

  As spellcasters, they tend to be quite good in specific areas. Their mystical
  relationship with water makes it easier for them to use poison and ice magic,
  which use water occasionally as a material component. The legendary water
  magic of the Merfolk was lost in ancient times, but some of that affinity
  still remains. The instability of their own morphogenic matrix has made them
  very accomplished transmuters, but most other magic seems foreign to them.

Gargoyles (Gr)
  A cross between ordinary stone gargoyles and living beings, Gargoyles are
  hideous humanoids with an affinity to rock. They have low health, but large
  amounts of innate armour which increases further as they gain levels. They
  eventually gain the ability to fly.

  Gargoyles' partially living form grants them immunity to poison, as well as
  resistance to electricity, and protection from some effects of necromancy.
  Their natural armour makes them strong melee fighters, and they are naturally
  skilled with blunt weapons and in unarmed combat. They can also be exceptional
  earth-based conjurers.

Draconians (Dr)
  Draconians are human-dragon hybrids: humanoid in form and approximately
  human-sized, with wings, tails and scaly skins. Draconians start out in an
  immature form with brown scales, but as they grow in power they take on a
  variety of colours. This happens at an early stage in their career, and the
  colour is determined by chromosomes, not by behaviour.

  Most types of Draconians have breath weapons or special resistances.
  Draconians cannot wear body armour and advance very slowly in levels, but are
  reasonably good at all skills other than missile weapons, and they develop
  natural physical defences that compensate for the lack of body armour, without
  needing to train their Armour skill at all. Still, each colour has its own
  strengths and some have complementary weaknesses, which sometimes requires a
  bit of flexibility on the part of the player. They are good general-purpose
  spellcasters, and typically their spellcasting aptitudes will adapt slightly
  when they gain a colour.

  Draconian colours are detailed below, in the subsection titled
  `Draconian types`_.

Trolls (Tr)
  Trolls are monstrous creatures with powerful claws. They have thick, knobbly
  skins of any colour from putrid green to mucky brown, which are covered in
  patches of thick fur.

  They are incredibly strong, and regenerate rapidly from even the most terrible
  wounds. However, they are hopeless at spellcasting and learn most skills very
  slowly. Their large size prevents them from wearing most forms of armour.

Deep Elves (DE)
   The Deep Elves are a species of Elves who long ago fled the overworld to live
   in darkness underground. There, they developed their mental powers, evolving
   a natural gift for all forms of magic, and adapted physically to their new
   environment, becoming weaker and losing all colouration. They are poor at
   melee combat and physical defence, although they are capable at using bows
   and other ranged weapons.

Armataurs (At)
  The Armataurs are a large, scaled mammalian species, walking on four feet
  and swinging a powerful tail behind them. Their elephant-back armies
  terrorize the lands outside the Dungeon.

  Armataurs instinctively roll when moving toward foes, getting a free move.
  Their long, nimble tongues drink every last drop from potions, doubling
  their effects, but the strange syllables of magical scrolls slow them down.
  They have great aptitudes with armour and shields, though their body shape
  reduces the protection offered by body armour early on.

Gnolls (Gn)
  Gnolls are a species of caniform humanoids originally hailing from the arid
  deserts and grasslands of the east. In recent history they have become
  unusually attracted to the Dungeon, establishing tribes around and even
  inside of it. Unfortunately their long stay in the Dungeon has exposed their
  somewhat fragile minds to excessive amounts of its magic.

  On the one hand, their bizarrely altered brains now have incredible
  proficiency at learning every skill. On the other, these same alterations
  have rendered Gnolls incapable of selective learning. They learn all skills
  at the same time, so are generally unable to specialise in any one thing.

  In order to survive with this limitation, Gnolls use their universal
  knowledge to take advantage of every resource they find in the Dungeon. They
  also have powerful noses adapted to the Dungeon's scents, allowing them to
  easily locate where treasures lay hidden.


Intermediate Species
====================

Species classified as *Intermediate* require a broader understanding of the
mechanics of Crawl, have some weakness(es) that must be actively compensated
for, and/or add a relatively complex mechanic (or change in mechanic) to
gameplay.

Humans (Hu)
  Humans tend to be hardworking and industrious, and learn new things quickly.
  The Human species is the most versatile of all the species available to
  players. Humans advance quickly in levels and have equal abilities in most
  skills.

Kobolds (Ko)
  Kobolds are small, mysterious creatures of unknown origin. They are well
  suited to lurking in the darkness of the Dungeon, and have a reduced range of
  vision which also reduces the range at which they can be seen by enemies.

  They are competent in combat, especially with short blades, maces or ranged
  weapons, and are comfortable with all forms of magic. They are also very
  adept at using magical devices. Their small size makes them unable to wield
  large weapons, but they are agile and stealthy, and advance in levels as
  quickly as Humans.

Demonspawn (Ds)
  Demonspawn are horrible half-mortal, half-infernal creatures. Demonspawn can
  be created in any number of ways: magical experiments, breeding, unholy pacts,
  etc. Although many Demonspawn may initially be indistinguishable from those of
  pure mortal stock, they will inevitably grow horns, scales or other unusual
  features. Powerful members of this class of beings also develop a range of
  unholy abilities, which are listed as mutations.

  Demonspawn advance slowly in experience and learn most skills slightly slower
  than Humans, although they are talented at some forms of magic. They learn
  Invocations especially quickly, although the good gods will not accept their
  worship due to their unholy nature.

Djinn (Dj)
  Djinn are beings of smokeless fire. They enter the world spontaneously and
  without explanation, born with a tireless hunger for knowledge and adventure.
  Djinn have a unique relationship with magic: rather than learning spells
  from books, their spells come from within, welling up from their fiery core
  as they gain experience. They draw from that same fiery core to cast spells -
  for Djinn, magical power and health are one and the same.

  As elemental beings, Djinn are immune to poison and highly resistant to
  fire, though cold damage is deeply inimical to them. Since they float
  through the air without need for legs or feet, they cannot wear boots.

  Djinn are middlingly competent at most forms of physical combat, but have
  a particular aptitude for spellcasting. Their aptitudes for all forms of
  magic are phenomenal, though their unique relationship with magic means that
  they cannot choose to train magic skills independently.

Spriggans (Sp)
  Spriggans are small magical creatures distantly related to Elves. They love to
  frolic and cast mischievous spells.

  They are poor fighters and have little physical resilience, but they move
  extremely quickly and stealthily, and are incredible at dodging attacks. They
  are terrible at destructive magic - conjurations, summonings, necromancy and
  elemental spells. On the other hand, they are excellent at other forms of
  magic and at evoking magical items. Their size makes them unable to wear most
  armour. They cannot wield large weapons, and even most smaller weapons require
  both hands to be wielded by a Spriggan.

Ghouls (Gh)
  Ghouls are horrible undead creatures that sleep in their graves for years on
  end, only to rise and stalk the living. Slain foes heal these monstrous
  beings as they feast on the macabre energies released.

  They learn most skills slowly, although they make decent unarmed fighters
  with their claws. Due to their contact with the grave they can also learn to
  use ice, earth, poison and necromantic magic without too many difficulties.

  Like other undead, ghouls are naturally immune to poisons, negative energy
  and torment; have little warmth left to be affected by cold; and are not
  susceptible to mutations.

Tengu (Te)
  The Tengu are an ancient and feared species of bird-people with a legendary
  propensity for violence. Basically humanoid with bird-like heads and clawed
  feet, the Tengu can wear all types of armour except helmets and boots. Their
  magical nature helps them evade attacks while in motion, and despite their
  lack of wings, more experienced Tengu can magically fly.

  They are experts at all forms of fighting, including the magical arts of
  combat (conjurations, summonings and, to a lesser extent, necromancy). They
  are good at air and fire elemental magic, but poor at ice and earth magic.
  Tengu do not appreciate any form of servitude, and so are poor at using
  invocations. Their light avian bodies cannot sustain a great deal of injury.

Ogres (Og)
  Ogres are huge, chunky creatures who are very strong and robust, but are not
  nimble at all. They possess a raw talent for magic, but are poor at making
  use of magical devices. Ogres mature almost as quickly as Humans.

  Their preferred methods of avoiding beatings are dodging and the use of
  shields. Their large size prevents them from wearing most forms of armour.
  Ogres are proficient at using all types of melee weapons, but all
  sophisticated forms of missile combat are awkward for them. They are, however,
  good at throwing things, in particular boulders.

Advanced Species
================

*Advanced* species have some substantial weaknesses, and/or add multiple complex
new mechanics to gameplay. This category includes several species that
experienced players may not find difficult per se, but that may require quite
a bit of experience to adapt to. It also includes species that are just
plain difficult, such as Mummies.

Vine Stalkers (VS)
  Limber in shape, Vine Stalkers are anthropomorphic masses of thick vines.
  They possess a once-humanoid core, parasitised moments before death by the
  magical vines. Lacking any other discernible features, their faces are
  dominated by the disproportionate, vicious maw with which they disrupt and
  devour the magical energies of their foes.

  Magic courses freely through their bodies, and any damage they take is split
  between their health and magical reserves. They also physically regenerate
  at an alarming rate. However these traits come at a price: the dual nature of
  their bodies makes them extremely frail, and they cannot benefit from potions
  to heal their wounds.

  Living examples of adaptation, Vine Stalkers level up quickly and lend well
  to an all-out offensive style; trusting their stealth to choose their prey
  and then their regenerating capabilities to power through the wounds they may
  sustain in battle. Many members of the species however, are seen wielding
  magic quite competently and then switching to a hybrid style when their
  reserves start to run low, thus replenishing their shroud of magic and their
  spells' fuel with each voracious bite.

Vampires (Vp)
  Vampires are an undead species, with the ability to shift between bloodless
  and alive forms at will. Bloodless Vampires can heal themselves by drinking
  the blood of the living in combat, and have the traits of the undead (immunity
  to poisons, negative energy and torment, and resistance to damage from cold),
  but are much less resilient and cannot regenerate health when monsters are in
  sight. On the other hand, a Vampire full with blood will regenerate very
  quickly, but will lose all undead powers. Upon growing, they learn to
  transform from their bloodless form into a fast-moving bat. Unlike other
  undead species, they may be mutated normally at all times.

Demigods (Dg)
  Demigods are mortals with some divine or angelic ancestry, however distant.
  Demigods look more or less like members of their mortal part's species, but
  they are extremely robust and can draw on great supplies of magical energy.
  They are able to sculpt their attributes to a far greater extent than any
  other species, gaining substantial boosts to their choice of Strength,
  Intelligence or Dexterity as they gain experience. On the downside, they
  advance more slowly in experience than any other species, gain skills slightly
  less quickly than Humans and, due to their status, refuse to worship any god.

Formicids (Fo)
  The Formicids are a species of humanoid ants. Just like their tiny insect
  ancestors, the Formicids are well adept at earth work, both on the physical
  and magical sides. Their abilities have been used to tunnel immense
  underground communities and structures, many of which are tens of thousands of
  years old.

  Perhaps unfortunately, their strong ties to earth have left them completely
  impervious to being teleported or hasted; Formicids are tied to the earth with
  a complete sense of stasis. While this is a seemingly bad property for a
  dungeon adventurer, stasis has the beneficial effect of preventing many types
  of nasty hexes and maledictions.

  With the ability to lift ten times their own weight, the Formicids have
  strength rivaling that of Ogres. This, along with the fact that they have four
  arms, allows Formicid warriors to equip both a shield and a two-handed weapon
  at the same time.

  Formicids make good earth and venom mages, but are quite capable at both melee
  and ranged combat too. They are naturally bad at air magic and conjurations.

Nagas (Na)
  Nagas are a hybrid species: Human from the waist up with a large snake tail
  instead of legs.

  They are reasonably good at most things and advance in experience levels
  slightly slower than Humans. They are naturally resistant to poisons, can see
  invisible creatures, and have tough skin, but their tails are relatively slow
  and cannot move them around as quickly as can other creatures' legs (this only
  affects their movement rate; all other actions are at normal speed). Like
  Armataurs, their body shape also prevents them from gaining full protection
  from body armour. A Naga's biggest forte is stealth: Nagas are very good at
  moving unnoticed. Their tails eventually grow strong enough to constrict
  their foes in combat.

  Nagas can spit poison; the accuracy and damage of this poison increases with
  the Naga's experience level.

Octopodes (Op)
  These land-capable relatives of common octopuses can move about as fast as
  humans and yet retain the ability to swim underwater, although their dual
  adaptation is not as good as that of the shapechanging Merfolk.

  Octopodes have eight tentacle-shaped legs, and need four of them to move.
  While a tentacle lacks fingers, two tentacles are a rough equivalent of a
  human's arm where item manipulation is concerned - including wielding
  two-handed weapons with four. They can use no armour other than loose hats,
  but can handle shields just fine. Another peculiarity they have is the ability
  to wear eight rings, one on each tentacle.

  Their natural camouflage makes them excel at stealth, and they have good
  knowledge of poisons as well. They are also able to use their tentacles to
  constrict enemies - potentially several at a time!

Felids (Fe)
  Felids are a breed of cats that have been granted sentience. Originally they
  were witches' familiars that were magically augmented to provide help for
  their masters' rituals, yet many have abandoned, outlived, or, in at least one
  case, eviscerated their former masters and gone out into the world.

  While fully capable of using speech and most forms of magic, Felids are at a
  serious disadvantage due to their inability to use armour or weapons.

  Their agility and stealth are legendary, as is their ability to get to hard to
  reach places. They move faster than most species, but don't run as fast as
  Spriggans. Felids advance in levels very slowly. They are skilled with many
  forms of magic, though less so with raw elemental magic.

  Felids start with an extra life, and gain more as they increase in levels.
  Upon death, they will be resurrected in a safe place.

Barachim (Ba)
  Barachim are an amphibious humanoid species, spawned at the dawn of time as
  servants for the gods. Inevitably, they rebelled and fled into the mortal
  world; but even uncounted years later, the darkness still flees at their
  approach, remembering those who they once served.

  Barachim's most remarkable trait is their grossly overmuscled legs, which
  allow them to leap great distances. When not leaping, they are somewhat
  slow-moving, and the long sight-lines that their heritage creates can be a
  major disadvantage, but they can master almost any skill.

Meteorae (Me)
  Meteorae are the people of the heavens, fallen to earth. They possess exceptional
  skills, an uncanny sense for the space around them, and the ability to recover
  health and magic as they explore the dungeon. However, as creatures clearly not
  native to the world, they are easy prey for the dark forces that hunt adventurers
  - they have one-tenth as much time as normal before Zot finds them. (See the
  section on 'Zot' for more.)

Mummies (Mu)
  These are undead creatures who travel into the depths in search of revenge,
  redemption, or just because they want to.

  Mummies progress slowly in levels, half again as slowly as Humans in all
  skills except fighting, spellcasting and necromancy. The sacred embalming
  rituals that brought them into unlife also grant them a special connection
  with the divine, and as they increase in levels, they become increasingly
  in touch with the powers of death. However, their desiccated bodies are
  highly flammable. They also cannot drink.

  Like other undead, mummies are naturally immune to poisons, negative energy
  and torment; have little warmth left to be affected by cold; and are not
  susceptible to mutations.

Draconian types
========================================

Red Draconians
  feel at home in fiery surroundings. They are bad with ice magic but very
  proficient with fire. Their scorchingly hot breath will leave a lingering
  cloud of flame.

White Draconians
  stem from frost-bitten lands, and are naturally resistant to frost. Their
  breath is piercing cold. They are versed in ice magic, but bad at fire.

Green Draconians
  are used to venomous surroundings and breathe clouds of mephitic vapours. They
  are especially good in the arts of poison and without deficiencies in other
  magic realms. Later on, they will develop a poisonous stinger.

Yellow Draconians
  have a sulphurous breath full of corrosive acid, and later gain an acidic bite
  attack. They are acid resistant, too.

Grey Draconians
  have no breath weapon, but their bodies are adapted to the water, allowing
  them to swim. They are proficient with earth magic but bad with air magic, and
  they also have harder scales than other Draconians.

Black Draconians
  can unleash huge electrical discharges, and are naturally insulated. They are
  good at air magic but feel cumbersome with earth magic. Their wings will
  eventually grow larger, which allows them to fly when combined with their
  natural skill with air magic.

Purple Draconians
  are highly adapted to all spellcasting in general, and to hexes in
  particular. They are a bit better at evoking things than most other
  Draconians. They can breathe dispelling energy which strips those it hits of
  their enchantments, and are naturally stronger-willed than other draconians.

Pale Draconians
  are better at air and fire magic, and have no deficiencies in other schools.
  They breathe steam and, like their Purple cousins, have a slight advantage at
  Evocations.